---
title: "`constexpr std::shared_ptr`"
document: P3037R1
date: 2024-03-02
audience: SG7 Compile-time programming, LEWG Library Evolution
author:
  - name: Paul Keir
    email: <graham.keir@gmail.com>
toc: true
toc-depth: 4
---

\pagebreak

# Revision History

  - R1 2024-03-02
    - Added a motivating example
    - Included libc++ & MSVC STL in atomic operation considerations
  - R0 2023-11-06
    - Original Proposal

# Introduction

Since the adoption of [@P0784R7] in C++20, constant expressions can include
dynamic memory allocation; yet support for smart pointers extends only to
`std::unique_ptr` (since [@P2273R3] in C++23). As at runtime, smart pointers
can encourage hygienic memory management during constant evaluation; and with
no remaining technical obstacles, parity between runtime and compile-time
support for smart pointers should reflect the increased maturity of language
support for constant expression evaluation.  We therefore propose that
`std::shared_ptr` and associated class templates from [smartptr]{.sref} permit
`constexpr`{.cpp} evaluation.

# Motivation and Scope

It is convenient when the same C++ code can be deployed both at runtime and
compile time. Our recent project investigates performance scaling of *parallel*
constant expression evaluation in an experimental Clang compiler [@ClangOz].
As well as C++17 parallel algorithms, a prototype `constexpr`{.cpp}
implementation of the Khronos SYCL API was utilised, where a SYCL `buffer`
class abstracts over device and/or host memory. In the simplified code excerpt
below, the `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} data member ensures memory is properly
deallocated upon the `buffer`{.cpp}'s destruction, according to its owner
status. This is a common approach for runtime code, and a
`constexpr`{.cpp} `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} class implementation helpfully
bypasses thoughts of raw pointers, and preprocessor macros here; and the
impact of adding `constexpr`{.cpp} functionality to the SYCL implementation is
minimised.

```cpp
template <class T, int dims = 1>
struct buffer
{
  constexpr buffer(const range<dims> &r)
    : range_{ r }, data_{ new T[r.size()], [this](auto* p){ delete [] p; } } { }

  constexpr buffer(T* hostData, const range<dims>& r)
    : range_{ r }, data_{ hostData, [](auto){} } { }

  const range<dims> range_{};
  std::shared_ptr<T[]> data_{};
};
```

Two proposals adopted for C++26 and C++23 can facilitate a straightforward
implementation of comprehensive `constexpr`{.cpp} support for
`std::shared_ptr`: [@P2738R1] and [@P2448R2]. The former allows the
`get_deleter` member function to operate, given the type erasure required
within the `std::shared_ptr` unary class template. The latter can allow even
minor associated classes such as `std::bad_weak_ptr` to receive
`constexpr`{.cpp} qualification, while inheriting from the currently
non-`constexpr`{.cpp} class: `std::exception`. We furthermore propose that the
relational operators of `std::unique_ptr`, which can legally operate on
pointers originating from a single allocation during constant evaluation,
should also adopt the `constexpr`{.cpp} specifier.

As with C++23 `constexpr`{.cpp} support for `std::unique_ptr`, bumping the
value `__cpp_lib_constexpr_memory` is our requested feature macro change; yet
in the discussion and implementation presented here, we adopt the macro
`__cpp_lib_constexpr_shared_ptr`.

We below elaborate on points which go beyond the simple addition of the
`constexpr`{.cpp} specifier to the relevant member functions.

## Atomic Operations

The existing `std::shared_ptr` class can operate within a multithreaded runtime
environment. A number of its member functions may therefore be
defined using atomic functions; so ensuring that shared state is updated
correctly. Atomic functions are not qualified as `constexpr`{.cpp};
but as constant expressions must be evaluated by a single thread, a
`constexpr`{.cpp} `std::shared_ptr` implementation can safely skip calls to
atomic functions through the predication of `std::is_constant_evaluated`{.cpp}
(or `if consteval`). For example, here is a modified function from GCC's
libstdc++, called from `std::shared_ptr::use_count()` and elsewhere:

```cpp
constexpr long
_M_get_use_count() const noexcept
{
#ifdef __cpp_lib_constexpr_shared_ptr
  return std::is_constant_evaluated()
           ? _M_use_count
           : __atomic_load_n(&_M_use_count, __ATOMIC_RELAXED);
#else
  return __atomic_load_n(&_M_use_count, __ATOMIC_RELAXED);
#endif
}
```

The use of atomic intrinsics within Clang's libc++ and MSVC's STL can be
similarly elided. In `__memory/shared_ptr.h`, libc++ makes calls to the atomic
intrinsic `__atomic_load_n`{.cpp}, only via the inline C++ functions
`__libcpp_relaxed_load`{.cpp} and `__libcpp_acquire_load`{.cpp}; while
`__atomic_add_fetch`{.cpp} is accessed only via
`__libcpp_atomic_refcount_increment`{.cpp} and
`__libcpp_atomic_refcount_decrement`{.cpp}. Each of these four functions is
comprised only of return statement pairs, predicated upon *object-like* macros
including `_LIBCPP_HAS_NO_THREADS`{.cpp}; and so could easily be modified to
involve `std::is_constant_evaluated`{.cpp} as above.

In `stl/inc/memory`, the `std::shared_ptr` of MSVC's STL inherits a
`_Ref_count_base` member through `_Ptr_base`. `_Ref_count_base` has two
`_Atomic_counter_t` members (aliases of `unsigned long`{.cpp}), updated
atomically using the `_InterlockedCompareExchange`{.cpp};
`_InterlockedIncrement`{.cpp} (via the macro `_MT_INCR`); or
`_InterlockedDecrement`{.cpp} (via the macro `_MT_DECR`) atomic intrinsics. All
the (five) functions invoking these intrinsics can again make use of
`std::is_constant_evaluated` to avoid the atomic operations.

Adding `constexpr`{.cpp} support to an implementation of `std::shared_ptr`
built directly upon an `std::atomic` instance would need to take an alternative
approach; likely involving the modification of its `std::atomic` definition.

## Two Memory Allocations

Unlike `std::unique_ptr`, a `std::shared_ptr` must store not only the managed
object, but also the type-erased deleter and allocator, as well as the number
of `std::shared_ptr`s and `std::weak_ptr`s which own or refer to the managed
object. This information is managed as part of a dynamically allocated object
referred to as the *control block*.

Existing runtime implementations of `std::make_shared`{.cpp},
`std::allocate_shared`{.cpp},  
<!--
the two spaces above at the line's end produce a newline
-->
`std::make_shared_for_overwrite`{.cpp}, and
`std::allocate_shared_for_overwrite`{.cpp}, allocate memory for both the
control block, *and* the managed object, from a single dynamic memory
allocation; via `reinterpret_cast`{.cpp}.  This practise aligns with a remark
at [util.smartptr.shared.create]{.sref}; quoted below:

  - [7.1]{.pnum} Implementations should perform no more than one memory allocation.
  - [*Note 1*: This provides efficiency equivalent to an intrusive smart pointer.  — *end note*]

As `reinterpret_cast`{.cpp} is not permitted within a constant expression, an
alternative approach is required for `std::make_shared`,
`std::allocate_shared`, `std::make_shared_for_overwrite`, and  
<!--
the two spaces above at the line's end produce a newline
-->
`std::allocate_shared_for_overwrite`.  A straightforward solution is to create
the object first, and pass its address to the appropriate `std::shared_ptr`
constructor. Considering the control block, this approach amounts to two
dynamic memory allocations; albeit at compile-time. Assuming that the runtime
implementation need not change, the remark quoted above can be left unchanged;
as this is only a recommendation, not a requirement.

## Relational Operators

Comparing dynamically allocated pointers within a constant expression is legal,
provided the result of the comparison is not unspecified.  Such comparisons are
defined in terms of a partial order, applicable to pointers which either point
"to different elements of the same array, or to subobjects thereof"; or to
"different non-static data members of the same object, or to subobjects of such
members, recursively..."; from paragraph 4 of [expr.rel]{.sref}. A simple
example program is shown below:

```cpp
constexpr bool ptr_compare()
{
  int* p = new int[2]{};
  bool b = &p[0] < &p[1];
  delete [] p;
  return b;
}

static_assert(ptr_compare());
```

It is therefore unsurprising that we include the `std::shared_ptr` relational
operators within the scope of our proposal to apply `constexpr`{.cpp} to all
functions within [smartptr]{.sref}; the `std::shared_ptr` aliasing
constructor makes this especially simple to configure:

```cpp
constexpr bool sptr_compare()
{
  double *arr = new double[2];
  std::shared_ptr p{&arr[0]}, q{p, p.get() + 1};
  return p < q;
}

static_assert(sptr_compare());
```

Furthermore, in the interests of `constexpr`{.cpp} consistency, we propose that
the relational operators of `std::unique_ptr` *also* now include support for
constant evaluation. As discussed above, the results of such comparisons are
very often well defined.

It may be argued that a `std::unique_ptr` which is the sole owner of an array,
or an object with data members, presents less need for relational operators.
Yet we must consider that a custom deleter can easily change the operational
semantics; as demonstrated in the example below. A `std::unique_ptr` should
also be legally comparable with itself.

```cpp
constexpr bool uptr_compare()
{
  short* p = new short[2]{};
  auto del = [](short*){};
  std::unique_ptr<short[]>               a{p+0};
  std::unique_ptr<short[],decltype(del)> b{p+1, del};
  return a < b;
}

static_assert(uptr_compare());
```

## Maybe Not Now, But Soon

A core message of C++23's [@P2448R2] is that the C++ community is served better
by including the language version alongside the tuple of possible inputs
(i.e. function and template arguments) considered for a `constexpr`{.cpp}
function invocation within a constant expression. Consequently, while there are
some functions in [smartptr]{.sref} which cannot possibly be so evaluated
*today*, we propose that these should also be specified with the
`constexpr`{.cpp} keyword. The following lists all such functions or
classes:

  * [util.smartptr.weak.bad]{.sref}: `std::bad_weak_ptr`{.cpp} cannot be constructed as it inherits from a class, `std::exception`, which has no `constexpr`{.cpp} member functions.
  * [util.smartptr.hash]{.sref}: The `operator()` member of the class template specialisations for `std::hash<std::unique_ptr<T,D>>` and `std::hash<std::shared_ptr<T>>` cannot be defined according to the *Cpp17Hash* requirements ([hash.requirements]{.sref}). (A pointer cannot, during constant evaluation, be converted to an `std::size_t` using `reinterpret_cast`{.cpp}; or otherwise.)
  * [util.smartptr.owner.hash]{.sref}: The two `operator()` member functions of the recently adopted `owner_hash` class, also cannot be defined according to the *Cpp17Hash* requirements.
  * [util.smartptr.shared.obs]{.sref}: The recently adopted `owner_hash()` member function of `std::shared_ptr`, also cannot be defined according to the *Cpp17Hash* requirements.

# Impact on the Standard

This proposal is a pure library extension, and does not require any new language features.

# Implementation

An implementation based on the GNU C++ Library (libstdc++) can be found
[here](https://github.com/SCT4SP/constexpr_shared_ptr). A comprehensive test
suite is included there within `tests/shared_ptr_constexpr_tests.cpp`;
alongside a standalone bash script to run it. All tests pass with recent GCC
and Clang (i.e. versions supporting P2738; `__cpp_constexpr >= 202306L`).

# Proposed Wording

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to all of the following:

  - (In alphabetical order by last name) Thiago Macieira, Arthur O'Dwyer,
    Jonathan Wakely and everyone else who contributed to the online forum
    discussions.

\pagebreak

---
references:
  - id: P0784R7
    citation-label: P0784R7
    title: "More constexpr containers"
    author:
      family: Dimov
      given: Peter
      family: Dionne
      given: Louis
      family: Ranns
      given: Nina
      family: Smith
      given: Richard
      family: Vandevoorde
      given: Daveed
    issued:
      year: 2019
    URL: https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2019/p0784r7.html

  - id: P2738R1
    citation-label: P2738R1
    title: "`constexpr` cast from `void*`: towards `constexpr` type-erasure"
    author:
      family: Jabot
      given: Corentin
      family: Ledger
      given: David
    issued:
      year: 2023
    URL: https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2738r1.pdf

  - id: P2448R2
    citation-label: P2448R2
    title: "Relaxing some `constexpr`{.cpp} restrictions"
    author:
      family: Revzin
      given: Barry
    issued:
      year: 2022
    URL: https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2022/p2448r2.html

  - id: P2273R3
    citation-label: P2273R3
    title: "Making `std::unique_ptr` constexpr"
    author:
      family: Fertig
      given: Andreas
    issued:
      year: 2021
    URL: https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2021/p2273r3.pdf

  - id: ClangOz
    citation-label: ClangOz
    title: "Performance Analysis of Compiler Support for Parallel Evaluation of C++ Constant Expressions"
    author:
      family: Gozillon
      given: Andrew
      family: Haeri
      given: Hossein
      family: Riordan
      given: James
      family: Keir
      given: Paul
    issued:
      year: 2024
    URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-51075-5_6
---
