changequote(`{{', `}}')
---
title: "`constexpr std::shared_ptr`"
document: P3037R4
date: 2024-10-21
audience: LEWG Library Evolution
author:
  - name: Paul Keir
    email: <graham.keir@gmail.com>
toc: true
toc-depth: 4
---

\pagebreak

# Revision History

  - R4 2024-10-21
    - Added `constexpr`{.cpp} qualifier to the wording for `std::bad_weak_ptr`{.cpp} with [@P3068R4]
    - Updated ClangOz reference in motivation
  - R3 2024-09-03
    - Removed `constexpr`{.cpp} specification from `reinterpret_pointer_cast`{.cpp} (see below [here](#maybe-not-now-but-soon))
    - Added references to [@P3309R1] and [@P3068R4]
    - Added details of a second implementation based on libc++
  - R2 2024-05-24
    - Added wording
    - Removed `constexpr`{.cpp} specification from some functions (see below [here](#maybe-not-now-but-soon))
    - Removed SG7 from Audience (post 2024 Spring meeting in Tokyo)
  - R1 2024-03-05
    - Added a motivating example
    - Included libc++ & MSVC STL in atomic operation considerations
  - R0 2023-11-06
    - Original Proposal

# Introduction

Since the adoption of [@P0784R7] in C++20, constant expressions can include
dynamic memory allocation; yet support for smart pointers extends only to
`std::unique_ptr`{.cpp} (since [@P2273R3] in C++23). As at runtime, smart
pointers can encourage hygienic memory management during constant evaluation;
and with no remaining technical obstacles, parity between runtime and
compile-time support for smart pointers should reflect the increased maturity
of language support for constant expression evaluation.  We therefore propose
that `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} and appropriate class template member functions
from [smartptr]{.sref} permit `constexpr`{.cpp} evaluation.

# Motivation and Scope

It is convenient when the same C++ code can be deployed both at runtime and
compile time. Our recent project investigates performance scaling of *parallel*
constant expression evaluation in an experimental Clang compiler [@ClangOz]. As
well as C++17 parallel algorithms, a prototype `constexpr`{.cpp} implementation
of the Khronos SYCL API was utilised, where a SYCL `buffer` class abstracts
over device and/or host memory. In the simplified code excerpt below, the
`std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} data member ensures memory is properly deallocated upon
the `buffer`{.cpp}'s destruction, according to its owner status. This is a
common approach for runtime code, and a `constexpr`{.cpp}
`std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} class implementation helpfully bypasses thoughts of raw
pointers and preprocessor macros. The impact of adding `constexpr`{.cpp}
functionality to the SYCL implementation is therefore minimised.

```cpp
template <class T, int dims = 1>
struct buffer
{
  constexpr buffer(const range<dims> &r)
    : range_{ r }, data_{ new T[r.size()], [this](auto* p){ delete [] p; } } { }

  constexpr buffer(T* hostData, const range<dims>& r)
    : range_{ r }, data_{ hostData, [](auto){} } { }

  const range<dims> range_{};
  std::shared_ptr<T[]> data_{};
};
```

Adopted C++26 proposal [@P2738R1] facilitates a straightforward implementation
of comprehensive `constexpr`{.cpp} support for `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp},
allowing the `get_deleter` member function to operate, given the type erasure
required within the `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} unary class template. We
furthermore propose that the relational operators of `std::unique_ptr`{.cpp},
which can legally operate on pointers originating from a single allocation
during constant evaluation, should also adopt the `constexpr`{.cpp} specifier.

As with C++23 `constexpr`{.cpp} support for `std::unique_ptr`, bumping the
value `__cpp_lib_constexpr_memory` is our requested feature macro change; yet
in the discussion and implementation presented here, we adopt the macro
`__cpp_lib_constexpr_shared_ptr`{.cpp}.

We below elaborate on points which go beyond the simple addition of the
`constexpr`{.cpp} specifier to the relevant member functions.

## Atomic Operations

The existing `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} class can operate within a multithreaded
runtime environment. A number of its member functions may therefore be defined
using atomic functions; so ensuring that shared state is updated correctly.
Atomic functions are not qualified as `constexpr`{.cpp}; but as constant
expressions must be evaluated by a single thread, a `constexpr`{.cpp}
`std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} implementation can safely skip calls to atomic
functions through the predication of `std::is_constant_evaluated`{.cpp} (or `if
consteval`). For example, here is a modified function from GCC's libstdc++,
called from `std::shared_ptr::use_count()`{.cpp} and elsewhere:

```cpp
constexpr long
_M_get_use_count() const noexcept
{
#ifdef __cpp_lib_constexpr_shared_ptr
  return std::is_constant_evaluated()
           ? _M_use_count
           : __atomic_load_n(&_M_use_count, __ATOMIC_RELAXED);
#else
  return __atomic_load_n(&_M_use_count, __ATOMIC_RELAXED);
#endif
}
```

The use of atomic intrinsics within Clang's libc++ and MSVC's STL can be
elided similarly. In `__memory/shared_ptr.h`, libc++ makes calls to the atomic
intrinsic `__atomic_load_n`{.cpp}, only via the inline C++ functions
`__libcpp_relaxed_load`{.cpp} and `__libcpp_acquire_load`{.cpp}; while
`__atomic_add_fetch`{.cpp} is accessed only via
`__libcpp_atomic_refcount_increment`{.cpp} and
`__libcpp_atomic_refcount_decrement`{.cpp}. Each of these four functions is
comprised only of return statement pairs, predicated upon *object-like* macros
including `_LIBCPP_HAS_NO_THREADS`{.cpp}; and so could easily be modified to
involve `std::is_constant_evaluated`{.cpp} as above.

In `stl/inc/memory`, the `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} of MSVC's STL inherits a
`_Ref_count_base` member through `_Ptr_base`. `_Ref_count_base` has two
`_Atomic_counter_t` members (aliases of `unsigned long`{.cpp}), updated
atomically using the `_InterlockedCompareExchange`{.cpp};
`_InterlockedIncrement`{.cpp} (via the macro `_MT_INCR`); or
`_InterlockedDecrement`{.cpp} (via the macro `_MT_DECR`) atomic intrinsics. All
the (five) functions invoking these intrinsics can again make use of
`std::is_constant_evaluated` to avoid the atomic operations.

Adding `constexpr`{.cpp} support to an implementation of
`std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} utilising `std::atomic`{.cpp}
would need to take an alternative approach; likely involving the modification
of its `std::atomic`{.cpp} definition.
Recently, [@P3309R1] has proposed adding such `constexpr` functionality
to `std::atomic` (and `std::atomic_ref`) for C++26.

## Two Memory Allocations

Unlike `std::unique_ptr`, a `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} must store not only the
managed object, but also the type-erased deleter and allocator, as well as the
number of `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp}s and `std::weak_ptr`{.cpp}s which own or
refer to the managed object. This information is managed as part of a
dynamically allocated object referred to as the *control block*.

Existing runtime implementations of `std::make_shared`{.cpp},
`std::allocate_shared`{.cpp},  
<!--
the two spaces above at the line's end produce a newline
-->
`std::make_shared_for_overwrite`{.cpp}, and
`std::allocate_shared_for_overwrite`{.cpp}, allocate memory for both the
control block, *and* the managed object, from a single dynamic memory
allocation; via `reinterpret_cast`{.cpp}.  This practise aligns with a remark
at [util.smartptr.shared.create]{.sref}; quoted below:

  - [7.1]{.pnum} Implementations should perform no more than one memory allocation.
  - [*Note 1*: This provides efficiency equivalent to an intrusive smart pointer.  — *end note*]

As `reinterpret_cast`{.cpp} is not permitted within a constant expression, an
alternative approach is required for `std::make_shared`,
`std::allocate_shared`, `std::make_shared_for_overwrite`, and  
<!--
the two spaces above at the line's end produce a newline
-->
`std::allocate_shared_for_overwrite`.  A straightforward solution is to create
the object first, and pass its address to the appropriate
`std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} constructor. Considering the control block, this
approach amounts to two dynamic memory allocations; albeit at compile-time.
Assuming that the runtime implementation need not change, the remark quoted
above can be left unchanged; as this is only a recommendation, not a
requirement.

## Relational Operators

Comparing dynamically allocated pointers within a constant expression is legal,
provided the result of the comparison is not unspecified.  Such comparisons are
defined in terms of a partial order, applicable to pointers which either point
"to different elements of the same array, or to subobjects thereof"; or to
"different non-static data members of the same object, or to subobjects of such
members, recursively..."; from paragraph 4 of [expr.rel]{.sref}. A simple
example program is shown below:

```cpp
constexpr bool ptr_compare()
{
  int* p = new int[2]{};
  bool b = &p[0] < &p[1];
  delete [] p;
  return b;
}

static_assert(ptr_compare());
```

It is therefore unsurprising that we include the `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp}
relational operators within the scope of our proposal to apply
`constexpr`{.cpp} to all functions within [smartptr]{.sref}; the
`std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} aliasing constructor makes this especially simple to
configure:

```cpp
constexpr bool sptr_compare()
{
  double *arr = new double[2];
  std::shared_ptr p{&arr[0]}, q{p, p.get() + 1};
  return p < q;
}

static_assert(sptr_compare());
```

Furthermore, in the interests of `constexpr`{.cpp} consistency, we propose that
the relational operators of `std::unique_ptr`{.cpp} *also* now include support
for constant evaluation. As discussed above, the results of such comparisons
are very often well defined.

It may be argued that a `std::unique_ptr`{.cpp} which is the sole owner of an
array, or an object with data members, presents less need for relational
operators. Yet we must consider that a custom deleter can easily change the
operational semantics; as demonstrated in the example below. A
`std::unique_ptr`{.cpp} should also be legally comparable with itself.

```cpp
constexpr bool uptr_compare()
{
  short* p = new short[2]{};
  auto del = [](short*){};
  std::unique_ptr<short[]>               a{p+0};
  std::unique_ptr<short[],decltype(del)> b{p+1, del};
  return a < b;
}

static_assert(uptr_compare());
```

## Maybe Not Now, But Soon

The functions from [smartptr]{.sref} listed below cannot possibly be evaluated
within a constant expression. We *do not* propose that their specifications
should change. While C++23's [@P2448R2] allows such functions to be annotated
as `constexpr`{.cpp}, we suggest that in this instance the C++ community will
be served better by a future update; when their constant evaluation becomes
possible.

  * [util.smartptr.hash]{.sref}: The `operator()` member of the class template specialisations for `std::hash<std::unique_ptr<T,D>>` and `std::hash<std::shared_ptr<T>>` cannot be defined according to the *Cpp17Hash* requirements ([hash.requirements]{.sref}). (A pointer cannot, during constant evaluation, be converted to an `std::size_t` using `reinterpret_cast`{.cpp}; or otherwise.)
  * [util.smartptr.owner.hash]{.sref}: The two `operator()` member functions of the recently adopted `owner_hash` class, also cannot be defined according to the *Cpp17Hash* requirements.
  * [util.smartptr.shared.obs]{.sref}: The recently adopted `owner_hash()` member function of `std::shared_ptr`, also cannot be defined according to the *Cpp17Hash* requirements.
  * [util.smartptr.weak.obs]{.sref}: The recently adopted `owner_hash()` member function of `std::weak_ptr`, also cannot be defined according to the *Cpp17Hash* requirements.
  * [util.smartptr.shared.cast]{.sref}: Neither of the two `reinterpret_pointer_cast`{.cpp} overloads can be included as their implementations will typically call `reinterpret_cast`{.cpp}, which is prohibited here.

We also *do not* propose any specification change for the overloads of
`operator<<`{.cpp} for `std::shared_ptr`{.cpp} and `std::unique_ptr`{.cpp},
from [util.smartptr.shared.io]{.sref} and [unique.ptr.io]{.sref}. Unlike the
functions above, a `constexpr`{.cpp} implementation for the
overloads could today use a vendor-specific extension; do
nothing; or simply report an error. But such possibilities should be
discussed in a separate proposal focused on I/O.

# Impact on the Standard

This proposal is a pure library extension, and does not require any new language features.

# Implementation

An implementation based on the GNU C++ Library (libstdc++) can be found
[here](https://github.com/SCT4SP/constexpr_shared_ptr). A comprehensive test
suite is included there within `tests/shared_ptr_constexpr_tests.cpp`;
alongside a standalone bash script to run it. All tests pass with recent GCC
and Clang (i.e. versions supporting [@P2738R1]; `__cpp_constexpr >= 202306L`).

A second implementation, by Hana Dusíková, based on the "libc++" C++ Library is
also available: on Github
[here](https://github.com/hanickadot/llvm-project/tree/P3309-constexpr-atomic-and-atomic-ref)
(via commit 23217d0); and with a corresponding Compiler Explorer instance
[here](https://compiler-explorer.com/z/8cj7nc1no).

# Proposed Wording

The following wording changes apply to [@N4981] and can also be viewed on
Github via a fork of the *C++ Standard Draft Sources* repository
[here](https://github.com/cplusplus/draft/compare/20fa26d6...pkeir:draft:main).

include({{draft-wording.diff}})

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to all of the following:

  - (In alphabetical order by last name.) Peter Dimov, Hana Dusíková, Thiago Macieira, Arthur O'Dwyer, Jonathan Wakely and everyone else who contributed to the BSI Panel and online forum discussions.

\pagebreak

---
references:
  - id: P0784R7
    citation-label: P0784R7
    title: "More constexpr containers"
    author:
      family: Dimov
      given: Peter
      family: Dionne
      given: Louis
      family: Ranns
      given: Nina
      family: Smith
      given: Richard
      family: Vandevoorde
      given: Daveed
    issued:
      year: 2019
    URL: https://wg21.link/p0784

  - id: P2738R1
    citation-label: P2738R1
    title: "`constexpr` cast from `void*`: towards `constexpr` type-erasure"
    author:
      family: Jabot
      given: Corentin
      family: Ledger
      given: David
    issued:
      year: 2023
    URL: https://wg21.link/p2738

  - id: P2448R2
    citation-label: P2448R2
    title: "Relaxing some `constexpr`{.cpp} restrictions"
    author:
      family: Revzin
      given: Barry
    issued:
      year: 2022
    URL: https://wg21.link/p2448

  - id: P2273R3
    citation-label: P2273R3
    title: "Making `std::unique_ptr` constexpr"
    author:
      family: Fertig
      given: Andreas
    issued:
      year: 2021
    URL: https://wg21.link/p2273

  - id: P3309R1
    citation-label: P3309R1
    title: "constexpr atomic<T> and atomic_ref<T>"
    author:
      family: Dusíková
      given: Hana
    issued:
      year: 2024
    URL: https://wg21.link/p3309

  - id: P3068R4
    citation-label: P3068R4
    title: "Allowing exception throwing in constant-evaluation"
    author:
      family: Dusíková
      given: Hana
    issued:
      year: 2024
    URL: https://wg21.link/p3068

  - id: ClangOz
    citation-label: ClangOz
    title: "ClangOz: Parallel constant evaluation of C++ map and reduce operations"
    author:
      family: Keir
      given: Paul
      family: Gozillon
      given: Andrew
    issued:
      year: 2024
    URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cola.2024.101298
---
